Refresh Define and automate processes documents (#1572)
hashicorp/web-unified-docs: content/well-architected-framework/docs/docs/define-and-automate-processes/deploy/zero-downtime-deployments/service-mesh.mdx

---
page_title: Deploy applications with traffic splitting for zero downtime

> description: Use Consul service mesh to split traffic between application versions for zero-downtime deployments. Configure service splitters for gradual rollouts.

Reviewer: We should refer to `services` instead of `applications`, Consul unit of configuration is the service, this is valid for all the configurations (health checks, service definition, service splitter, intentions, sidecar proxies, etc.). This suggestion applies to the whole document. 

In case the term was discussed previously and you decided to use application instead, disregard the comment.

## Why use service mesh for traffic splitting

Using service mesh for traffic splitting addresses the following operational challenges:

- **Enable fine-grained traffic control:** Load balancers provide basic traffic distribution, but service meshes offer percentage-based traffic splitting at the service level, request-level routing, and dynamic traffic shifting based on real-time metrics. Service mesh gives you precise control over which requests go to which version.

- **Improve observability and monitoring:** Service mesh provides automatic metrics collection, distributed tracing, and service health data, allowing you to detect issues immediately and make informed rollback decisions.

- **Automate service discovery and health checking:** Service mesh automatically discovers services, monitors health continuously, and removes unhealthy instances from traffic rotation without manual intervention.

> - **Reduce blast radius with progressive rollouts:** Deploying to all users simultaneously creates high risk. Service mesh enables progressive traffic shifting (5%, 10%, 25%, 50%, 100%), allowing you to validate each stage before proceeding and limiting the impact of deployment issues to a small user subset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Reduce blast radius with progressive rollouts:** Deploying to all users simultaneously increases the impact of malfunctions, in case of issues or bugs. Service mesh enables progressive traffic shifting (5%, 10%, 25%, 50%, 100%), allowing you to validate each stage before proceeding and limiting the impact of deployment issues to a small user subset.
```

Service mesh adds operational complexity and requires understanding of service mesh concepts. Use it when the benefits (observability, fine-grained control, automatic service discovery) justify the additional complexity.

## Implement traffic splitting with Consul

Consul service mesh provides traffic splitting through service splitter configurations. Service splitters define how traffic distributes between different service subsets, allowing you to gradually shift traffic from old versions to new versions while monitoring health metrics.

The following example shows a Consul service splitter configuration for canary deployment:

```hcl
# Service defaults for web application
Kind = "service-defaults"
Name = "web"
Protocol = "http"

# Service resolver defining service subsets
Kind = "service-resolver"
Name = "web"

Subsets = {
  v1 = {
    Filter = "Service.Meta.version == 1"
  }
  v2 = {
    Filter = "Service.Meta.version == 2"
  }
}

# Service splitter for traffic distribution
Kind = "service-splitter"
Name = "web"

Splits = [
  {
    Weight        = 90
    ServiceSubset = "v1"
  },
  {
    Weight        = 10
    ServiceSubset = "v2"
  },
]
```

> This configuration routes 90% of traffic to version 1 (stable) and 10% to version 2 (canary). To gradually shift traffic, update the weights (for example, 50/50, then 10/90, then 0/100) and apply the changes. Consul immediately adjusts traffic distribution without downtime.

Reviewer: > (for example, 50/50, then 10/90, then 0/100)

Should be:
```
(for example, 90/10, then 50/50, then 0/100)
```

Or did you mean these as steps 2,3,4?

> This configuration routes 90% of traffic to version 1 (stable) and 10% to version 2 (canary). To gradually shift traffic, update the weights (for example, 50/50, then 10/90, then 0/100) and apply the changes. Consul immediately adjusts traffic distribution without downtime.

Author: ```suggestion
This configuration routes 90% of traffic to version 1 (stable) and 10% to version 2 (canary). To gradually shift traffic, update the weights and apply the changes. Consul immediately adjusts traffic distribution without downtime.
```
